---
title: "The Ext and Tor derived functors: Tor (3/?)"
date: 2026-02-01 12:20:00 +0100
categories: [Homological Algebra?]
tags: [Abstract Nonsense, Categorical Bullsh*t]
math: true
---

$$
\newcommand{\t}[1]{\text{#1}}
\newcommand{\Ext}{\text{Ext}}
\newcommand{\Tor}{\text{Tor}}
\newcommand{\Hom}{\text{Hom}}
\newcommand{\ker}{\text{ker}}
\newcommand{\Syz}{\text{Syz}}
\newcommand{\im}{\text{im}}
$$

Perhaps it is wiser to write my exact sequences directly in LaTeX rather than import screenshots, so I will do that for this post, maybe then it can actually look somewhat professional. 

Much the same as with $\Ext,$ we consider $\t{R-Mod}$ for an arbitrary ring $R,$ though for simplicity we may assume here that $R$ is commutative. $\Tor$ is the derived functor of the functor $T := - \otimes_R B$, and it measures, loosely speaking, the common torsion between two modules $A$ and $B$ over $R$ (to be pedantic, one may only speak of measuring this torsion over a PID, so this is only for the sake of intuition and in the rather restricted case of $R$ a PID. More generally, it measures the flatness of a module.) Evidently, if $A$ is flat, or torsion-free over a PID, for instance, then $\Tor^1_R(A, B) = 0$ for any $B$. The construction is similar as with $\Ext$, considering a resolution of either the module in the first or second argument, the difference being that the functor $T$ is right-exact, unlike $\Hom_R$ which is left-exact. 

Consider a (projective) resolution $P_\bullet$ of $A$. 

$$
\ldots \to P_2 \to P_1 \to P_0 \to A \to 0
$$

(Ultimately which argument we resolve does not matter much, as $\Tor^1_R(A, B) \cong \Tor^1_R(B, A)$)
Applying $- \otimes_R B$, we obtain the following sequence, which is not necessarily left-exact, but is right-exact.


$$
\ldots \to P_2 \otimes_R B \to P_1 \otimes_R B \to P_0 \otimes_R B \to 0
$$

Then, $\Tor^i_R(A, B) = H_i(T(P_\bullet)).$

Let's explore some properties of $\Tor.$
First and foremost, $\Tor^0(A, B) \cong A \otimes B$ for any module $A, B,$ which is a property of derived functors in general. I will express it in terms of left derived functors $L^i$, but it holds for right derived functors $R^i,$ too:

$$ 
L^0 F \cong F.
$$

As briefly mentioned earlier, $\Tor$ can measure flatness. If $A$ or $B$ are flat, $\Tor^n_R (A, B) = 0$. 
Additionally, $\Tor$ preserves direct sums in both arguments:

$$
\Tor^n (M_1 \oplus M_2, N) \cong \Tor^n(M_1, N) \oplus \Tor^n(M_2, N);
$$

$$
\Tor^n (M, N_1 \oplus N_2) \cong \Tor^n(M, N_1) \oplus \Tor^n(M, N_2).
$$
(I omitted the subscript $R$ since it becomes rather redundant to write.)
The last property, one which I also briefly mentioned in the beginning, is that $\Tor$ is balanced, meaning that

$$
\Tor^n (M, N) \cong \Tor^n(N, M)
$$

for all $n > 0.$